Death is inevitable, but the rate of
decline is very much up to us. But the
drawback that young people have is they
only begin to realize the inevitability
of the decline when it besets them. So
your team that came in for testing that
are in their 20s, when I'm looking at
these results, there were issues that
were uncovered that were a concern. And
ignoring it doesn't lead to a good
outcome when you're 65. But a lot of
people have this issue. So it's okay to
speak freely about this. Yeah. The
biggest concern is that Dr. Dr. Peter
Aia is the go-to physician for high
performers, celebrities, and anyone
serious about unlocking the science
behind a longer, stronger, and healthier
life. I had a big epiphany at a funeral
of a friend of mine who I realized had
declined so much during their last
decade that when they couldn't do those
things that gave them pleasure because
of injuries, aches, and pains, they
weren't enjoying life. I call it the
marginal decade. Wow. Okay. So, what are
the most important parts of my health
that I should be thinking about for
longevity? So there's muscle mass,
muscle strength, but we don't have a
single metric that we can measure that
better predicts how long they will live
and how high their V2 max is, which is a
maximum amount of oxygen you can
consume. And if you compare somebody who
is in the top 2% to someone who is in
the bottom 25%, there is a 400%
difference in their all-c cause
mortality over the coming year. But how
do I know if it's an issue or not? We'll
go into much more detail around that,
but the way to avoid this is to train
specifically for that marginal decade.
And there's so many things that we just
do wrong. The sooner you start, the
better. So, rule number
one, this has always blown my mind a
little bit. 53% of you that listen to
the show regularly haven't yet
subscribed to the show. So, could I ask
you for a favor before we start? If you
like the show and you like what we do
here and you want to support us, the
free simple way that you can do just
that is by hitting the subscribe button.
And my commitment to you is if you do
that, then I'll do everything in my
power, me and my team, to make sure that
this show is better for you every single
week. We'll listen to your feedback.
We'll find the guests that you want me
to speak to and we'll continue to do
what we do. Thank you so
much. Dr. Peter, what is keeping you
busy at the moment in terms of the
subjects that you wrote about and
outlive, but the work that you do online
and the work you do in the variety of
businesses that you have? What is
keeping you fascinated at the moment?
Like what is what does one's mind focus
on? I wish I could say one thing.
There's probably a few things and maybe
that's um not good. Uh maybe the most
successful people in life only think
about one thing. I would say one of the
things I'm thinking a lot about is how
to translate outlive into a delivery
system uh obviously digitally that
basically operationalizes what is in
that book in a manner that allows people
to with as little friction as possible
implement the solutions for themselves.
So basically how do you live a longer
life? How do you age uh as gracefully as
possible and maximize your health span?
I think the other thing I'm focused on
that is related to that of course but
distinct um which I know your team got
to participate in a little bit this week
was kind of how to train people for
their marginal decade right so this idea
of we're all going to have a last decade
of life I call it the marginal decade
just so that we can get comfortable
talking about something that people
don't like to think about and um I'm
convinced that ignoring it and Not
thinking about it doesn't lead to a good
outcome. Instead, if you prepare for it
and train for it like an athlete trains
and prepares for their sport, uh you'll
have the best version of that possible.
Marginal decades and centurion
decathlon. Did I say that correctly?
Centinarian decathlon. Yep. Centinarian
decathlon. Can you explain these two
terms to me? Y. So, the marginal decade
is the last decade. Last decade of life.
Again, it's this weird thing where most
people don't know the day they've
entered it, but most people also realize
at some point when they're in it.
Um, I thought a lot about it. This was
sort of a big epiphany that I had in
2018 when I was sitting in the in the
church at a funeral of the parent of a
friend of mine who's who I realized had
declined so much during the last decade
of their life that even though they were
alive they weren't enjoying life. The
things that they loved to do in the case
of this individual play golf and tend to
the garden they couldn't do. they just
physically couldn't do it right. They
had injuries. They had aches and pains.
And when they couldn't do those things
that gave them pleasure, they retreated
from life. And I I I don't think there's
a person listening to us who can't
appreciate that because they they've
witnessed it, right? They've seen it in
a parent, a grandparent, a loved one.
And I don't know, there was just
something about that moment, which is
often the case, right? It's usually like
years and years of thinking about
something and it crystallizes in an
instant. But in that moment, I realized
aha the way to avoid this is to train
specifically for that decade. And the
best model for how to do that is to look
at athletes because every athlete trains
with specificity, right? So think think
of like all the different types of
athletes you would know. So if you think
about like a sprinter or a basketball
player or a football player, they are so
different and very little of their
training looks like the other guy. And
the reason for that is they're doing
something very specific, right? The
sprinter has a goal which is to move 100
meters as fast as possible. That's it.
And that requires a certain set of
skills. And the footballer has a totally
different goal. Yes, he has to be able
to run fast for short distances, but
just being able to run fast would not
produce in, you know, superior results.
And then the basketball player would be
different. And then the skier would have
a totally different set of skills. So I
said, "Well, who's the most well-rounded
athlete out there?" It's the decathlete
because that guy's got to do 10
different things really well. Now, he or
she doesn't have to be the best in the
world at those 10. In fact, they never
are. But overall they're considered the
best athlete because of the diversity
and breadth of what they can do. And so
I said that is our model. So what is the
centinarian decathlon then is I say to
you Stephen one day you are going to be
in your marginal
decade. What do you want to be able to
do physically athletically in that last
decade? It's the answer is so clear to
me because it's associated with all the
things that make me happy. So it would
be being able to explore the world still
with my partner, my romantic partner. It
would be But I would even dig further.
Tell me what that looks like. Okay. So I
went to Bali. Mhm. And me and my
girlfriend wanted to go white water
rafting. And to get down to the white
water rafts in Bali, we had to walk down
and then up again. Mhm. About a 100
meters of stairs. And as I went down
those stairs, I had one of those moments
that it sounds like you had at the
funeral where I realized that my dad
could not walk down these stairs. He
couldn't walk down them and he couldn't
walk up them. And by the way, it's a
different reason. I'm going to point
this out and I want to come back to your
story. Walking down is not about
endurance. Walking down is about
eccentric strength in the quads to be
able to uh decelerate the body as it's
moving down. Very important. Coming up
is about concentric strength in the
quads and glutes. and endurance. Okay.
All right. But continue. No, that's a
really good point because they're two
different training systems. And then the
reason why that was so important was
because of the great time I had in the
white water raft with my girlfriend. So
going down that lake through barley and
I thought, gosh,
it
hadn't if I'm not careful and I don't
think about this, I won't be able to
have these experiences when I'm 60. What
was involved in being in the raft? Yeah.
So, a lot of strength required to like
row um to keep us away from the rocks um
to push us off when we got stuck. Um
fall in the water, get it back in the
boat.
Absolutely. Think about the scapular
stability that's required. Think about
the upper body strength you need to lift
yourself back into a boat if you fall. I
mean, the list goes on and on and on.
And it was it was it took a long time.
We were out there for two hours going
through this lake. So, the other thing I
think about is Christmas. And I I think
about my nieces. So, my brother's a year
older than me and he has three kids
under the age of six. And you know what
that's like? These kids just sprint off
in every direction. And they'll say to
my dad, they'll say, "Come and play in
the garden." And my dad um wouldn't be
able to play with them in the garden the
way that they would want to play in the
garden, running around um being chased
around. So, my dad just watches them
from the kitchen. And so, these are just
obviously all the emotional things come
to mind first because those are the
things that stay with us. I'll give you
one more.
Um, the other thing that comes to mind
as a man is just being able to protect
my family. And I don't necessarily mean
wrestle an intruder, but I mean like
lift things. And um, if something falls,
being able to pick it up and move it. So
those are the things that come come to
mind first and foremost. It's
protection, it's memories, it's
activities that create relationships and
connection. I mean, that's exactly the
exercise we do, right? we take people
through, give us the 10 most important
things you want to be able to do. So
like if you start with, I want to be
able to go back to Bali and I want to be
able to go down those hundred stairs,
get in the raft, go down the river, come
back up the stairs, that gets broken
down into very specific movement
patterns. Playing football with the kids
out back gets broken down into very
specific movement patterns. By the way,
they're very different, right? That one
comes down much more to foot reactivity,
lateral movement, things like that.
Being able to pick something up off the
floor is yet another set of movement
patterns. It turns out there are
approximately 27 physical requirements
that are necessary to do the sum total
of most things people want to do. Part
of the reason why I think people don't
care enough is because they see aging as
inevitable. Mhm. So they look at their
their parents, their grandparents, and
go they're immobile. They can't function
properly. That's my destiny. It's
genetic.
Obviously, I don't agree with that.
Although I have tremendous empathy for
people who might feel that way. It's uh
when you see something as ubiquitous as
the decline
of untold numbers of people as they age,
it would be very easy and tempting to
say that that is the inevitability of
our species. Death is inevitable despite
what some biohackers may tell you. Um
decline is inevitable but the rate of
decline is very much up to us and the
preservation of strength, stamina,
movement capacity, uh those things are
largely up to us. In fact, there are
actual data that demonstrate quite
clearly. In fact, I was just reading a
paper yesterday in in the journal Cell
that looked at the role of exercise in
aging individuals to preserve
mitochondrial function. So, this is a
study that looked at older individuals
and it randomized one group to a
significant amount of exercise and the
other group was just sort of business as
usual being largely sedentary. And then
using pretty elaborate techniques where
you biopsy the muscle, they look at the
mitochondria which are the kind of the
powerhouse of the cell in these
individuals. And it turned out that in
the people who were exercising, there
was very little decline in the
mitochondrial function compared to what
happened in the people who were not
exercising. Now, just because your
mitochondria continue to function well
doesn't mean all aspects of aging are
offset. But it's a very important one to
demonstrate. And this is also true by
the way of strength and endurance.
There's a big difference in the rate of
decline of muscle mass, muscle strength,
and cardiopulmonary fitness in people
who exercise versus who don't. So, it's
all kind of a long-winded way of saying
um you have as an individual so much
more under your control than you
realize, but you have to sort of begin
to compounding the gains. I'll do it
when I'm 50.
Well, look, the good news is 50 isn't
too old. And I've met many people who
don't begin to do this until they're 50.
But again, the analogy I would use here
is comparable to that of investing for
retirement. The longer you wait, uh, the
less money you're probably going to have
at the end.
Springs to mind this graph I saw the
other day which I'd sent to my friends
which shows that, um, the the decline, I
think it was in muscle mass from when
you're 30. And it makes the point that
there's this line which on this graph
called disability. And it shows that
people who didn't have enough muscle
mass when they were 30 cross the line of
disability when they're 70. Uh and those
that did have more muscle mass at 30
don't don't get close to that line. Um
so that for me was shocking because it
goes to show that what I do now is going
to determine whether
I'm, you know, by all intents of
measures disabled when I'm 70 or if I'm
able. The sooner you start, the better.
The drawback that young people have is I
mean, you've had a you've had a great
experience because you're you're
introspective about it and you've been
able to observe it in somebody older.
So, you've been able to gather
motivation without having to experience
the decline yourself. Um, so that's a
that's a wonderful position to be in.
For many people, that's not the case.
They only begin to realize the
inevitability of the decline when it
besets them. But the way to think about
this again is another analogy is that of
a glider. So gliders eventually all have
to come down, right? Our health span is
basically a glider, but we have a lot of
control about how long it stays in the
air based on how high we can start it.
So if you think about, you know, would
you rather take a glider off a really
high cliff or off a low cliff, that's
the that's the decision we get to make.
And and we sort of call that concept
physiologic headroom. So the example you
gave is a great one, right? So muscle
mass, muscle strength provide an
enormous amount of physiologic headroom
as does cardopulinary fitness. These are
huge variables that make all the
difference. and everyone's coming down,
but the fitter you are, the slower the
rate of decline and therefore the longer
it takes before you cross below a
threshold. And that threshold differs by
different metrics, but once you're below
that threshold, it's very difficult to
engage in activities of enjoyment.
Peter, you're 51 now. 52. 52. What do
you wish someone had told you when you
were 32? I'm 32 years old. What do you
wish um someone had screamed in your
face and told you when you were my age?
It wouldn't have been much about
exercise. It would have been more about
other aspects of life for sure. Um
because for whatever reason, I've always
gravitated towards exercise. That's
always been a very high priority for me.
So, I think my advice to 32-year-old
Peter would be much more about um
relationships and emotional health. But
if I could go back and speak
to 14-year-old
Peter, he a he wouldn't have listened,
but I would have begged him to go a
little bit easier on his body and back
off on certain things that probably have
led to injuries I have today that could
have been prevented.
Can I ask what they said things are?
Sure. Um, I think I I think I lifted far
too heavy far too often and probably
without enough coaching on technique.
And so, you know, I by the time I was
27, I had a devastating back injury, but
it's one of those things that happened
without any incident, which which is
often the case, by the way, for a back
injury. When you really blow out a disc
in your back, it's not necessarily
something you did in that moment. It's
usually something that's been built up
from the past. So, this injury I had at
the age of 27 really was the result of
years
of unnecessarily heavy axial loading uh
loading done with probably insufficient
technique, you know, or technique that
was at times sloppy and under fatigue
because I used to do a lot under
fatigue. You know, I sort of believed in
training under a lot of fatigue and and
I I think that that's a mistake. I think
that training under very heavy load
should not be done under great fatigue.
Interesting. We'll talk about that as
well. On that point of advice that you
gave me there about emotional health.
One of the things that's been very front
of mind for me at the moment is men's
health, specifically men's emotional
health because I read a report that came
out in March called Lost Boys and it
just details this pretty horrific
picture of men's emotional health in the
UK at the moment in particular, but the
trend holds around the world. and it
came out in the start of March. It's
been in all the newspapers in the UK and
it details a couple of sort of headline
stats. The reverse gender pay gap
amongst young men. So women are now
earning more. You know the stats
probably around um soon for every yeah
suicide and one in seven young men are
unemployed or out of work. All these
sort of horrific stats and then it
compounds with things like suicide
suicidal ideation etc
etc. I was thinking about this this
morning when I was listening to some of
your your work. I was thinking I wonder
what Peter's perspective is
on what it is to be a man. Actually, it
does kind of dovetail into some of your
work around testosterone and the decline
in testosterone. And because one of the
things I was thinking about is how
testosterone plays a role in what it is
to be a man, but if you look at the
stats around testosterone, um it appears
to be declining. Yes. And I say this in
part as well because testosterone causes
a certain set of behaviors
um in men
that define and shape what a man is and
what they want and how they show up. And
even when I said earlier on protection
as one of the three things I cared
about, that's probably in part because
of the testosterone in me. This debate
around testosterone, this conversation
around testosterone um and its
decline, is it declining? It is. It is.
Why is it declining and what and is this
does it matter? Well, I think the second
question is easier to answer than the
first. I do think it matters. Um the the
the why is probably multiffactorial and
the why is just as important as the fact
that it is. In other words, the fact
that it's declining is both relevant for
the fact that a very very important
hormone that has incredible benefit to
men uh and women by the way is going
down. And we have to come up with a an
answer to that, right? Like so how do we
address that? Do we address it medically
where we replace that hormone
exogenously, meaning we give you that
hormone directly or do we try to fix the
underlying problem? So if you want to do
the latter, you have to know what the
underlying problem is. Now at the
population level, the best answer as to
why testosterone levels are declining
and um unmistakably they are. So the
data here are unambiguous. There's no
debate on this fact. Um the debate is
around the why. I believe that the best
answer probably has to do with two
things. Uh one is uh increase in body
weight and fat, body fat specifically in
men. Um and uh some combination of uh
reduced quality of sleep and um and and
and sort of disruption to sleep. So so
why are those two things relevant? So
when you increase body fat, two things
are happening. One is you're increasing
inflammation and you are reducing the
amount of testosterone that gets to stay
in the form of testosterone because part
of the testosterone gets converted into
estrogen. So with body fat comes more of
this process called aromatization or
converting testosterone into estrogen.
So if you think about what those two
things are doing, if you have more
inflammation, that reduces your ability
to make testosterone and you have more
capacity to turn the less testosterone
you make into estrogen, the net result
of that is both of those things are
reducing your total pool of
testosterone.
If you couple that with less, you know,
lower quality sleep, and I'm not talking
about over the last three years, I'm
comparing like now to say 40 years ago.
And what are all the reasons that people
might have poorer quality of sleep? Now
I think there are many but obviously
phones and social media and uh just the
stimulation of the world we live in
probably plays a greater role in that.
Sleep is when we make these hormones,
right? So so so we we make follicle
stimulating hormone and luteinizing
hormone at their maximum amount during
sleep and those are the hormones that
are driving the production of
testosterone. So, what we've seen in
many of our patients when they have low
testosterone, because there's a test you
can do to see if their testosterone is
low because their body can't make it or
because their brain isn't receiving
enough of a signal to make it. This is a
very easy thing to determine medically.
Unfortunately, most people aren't
subjected to that level of testing
because they go to these testosterone
shops on street corners that are just
giving everybody testosterone. But if if
if a physician is curious enough to
understand that you can give a patient a
drug or a hormone called hCG. HCG is
luteinizing hormone which is one of the
hormones made by the brain. So if you
come in and you see a man who's got very
low testosterone and you can understand
why you give him luteinizing hormone. If
he still has low testosterone, you know
that he has what's called primary
hypogonatism, which means his
testosterone is low because his testes
can't make testosterone. Conversely, if
you give the man luteinizing hormone and
all of a sudden his testosterone goes
up, he has secondary hypogonadism or I
mean, you could mix the primary
secondary there, but really what it the
terminology doesn't mean anything. what
matters is he can make testosterone, but
for some reason his brain isn't giving
his body the signal to do it. And that's
that's a classic finding in a person
who's under high stress and or not
sleeping well. So that's a long-winded
answer to your question, but I think
that those are probably the greatest
contributors to this. Now, people have
talked a lot about what about
microplastics, what about other
environmental factors, what about other
factors in nutrition beyond just the
ones that would contribute to excess
body fat. The evidence there is less
compelling, but I don't think we should
discount it. But I I think I think that
that if those things are playing a role,
it is probably much smaller than than
what we just talked about. I was
thinking as you were speaking about
sleep and testosterone about how and
also the link there with bad diets, how
if I've not slept well, I wake up and
make worse food choices for sure. And I
was like, is that like dopamine
dysfunction?
Probably more due to insulin signaling.
So um we know from ex really good
experimental studies that when you
sleepdeprive people they become insulin
resistant and the more insulin resistant
a person is the less they're able to
access their stored uh energy. So higher
insulin resistance means greater
difficulty accessing stored energy. So,
if you're if you wake up and you're if
you know if you have successive days of
poor sleep and you're becoming somewhat
insulin resistant, um you're going to
want to eat more because you're not able
to access your own natural stores of
fat, which is where we want to go for
energy. So, if you look at one
experiment that was done out of the
University of Chicago, they they took uh
healthy subjects, young young subjects,
and sleepd deprived them for somewhere
between 10 and 14 days. So, not a huge
period of time. And they only let them
sleep four hours a night, which by the
way, I know a lot of people who were
doing that for years at a time. In in
that 10 to 14 day period of time, their
insulin resistance was worsened by 50%.
This is in other words they they do an
experiment called a uglycemic clamp
where they inject them with glucose to
see how effectively they can put glucose
into their cells which is that's the
that's the hallmark of insulin
sensitivity is how well you can put
glucose into your muscles when it's
infused in you and their capacity to do
that was reduced by 50%. after such a
short intervention. Um, so I think sleep
uh restriction and unhealthy sleep is a
is a very underappreciated cause of
metabolic health and weight gain and
then by extension these other things
we're talking about. It seems to me to
be the thing furthest upstream in my
life that then causes this cascading
effect to how I show up in sort of
cognitive performance. How well I can
articulate myself if I go to the gym,
how hard my workout is, if I choose
healthy options versus unhealthy
options. So it feels like the and mood
in general. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, look, I
I I've said this before and I'm not the
first to say this, so I'm paraphrasing
others, but if you really stop to think
about it, sleep doesn't make a lot of
sense from an evolutionary perspective.
Like, if you go back in time a few
hundred thousand years, why would we
have spent a third of our life
unconscious? It didn't serve our
purpose. You can't mate, you can't hunt,
and you can't defend yourself.
So you have to believe that if we could
have evolved out of it, we would have
done it and we didn't. So that means
that whatever it's doing, it must be
really important. I mean core essential
to our existence. While I will
completely acknowledge that different
people have a different necessity or
requirement for how much they sleep, I
still think that many people
underestimate how much they need. You
know, you asked me at the start, you
said, um, what are the things that you
want to do when you reach your marginal
decade? And I gave you my answer. What's
your answer to that now that you're a
father in heaven or in a different
season of life? Well, they're very
similar to the types of things you're
thinking about. And I love how you've
got specific examples. So, I really like
playing with my kids, right? So, I can
imagine that in my marginal decade, I'll
have grandkids that are the age of my
kids. Yeah. Right. And and you know,
maybe a bit older, but but as I'm even
getting towards that marginal decade.
Okay. So, playing sports is really,
really fun. I really like playing
especially because when I grew up like I
played hockey because I grew up in
Canada and then I immediately went into
kind of boxing and martial arts and
those became my life. So now playing
sports that I didn't play much as a kid
is really fun. Like I'm really enjoying
baseball. I'm really enjoying soccer.
And um and so when you play these
things, you realize this is not an easy
thing to do when you get old. Like to
sit in the, you know, to play to sit in
the goal and actually like stop a ball
when a kid is blasting at you full stop.
You have to be able to move around. So
again, like I would love to be able to
play soccer, throw a football, throw and
hit a baseball as long as possible. you
can get into movements that are much
simpler. Uh, but if I can do all of
those things, I'm in great shape. Now,
of course, to be able to do that, I also
need to be able to do a lot of things
that many people also can't do in their
marginal decade, like sit on the floor,
get up off the floor under their own
power, um, you know, walk up x number of
flights of stairs, having the strength
to do that. I like doing certain things
like I like archery a lot. So it's, you
know, I want to be able to pull a bow
back. Obviously not at the same poundage
as the current bow that I pull back, but
I would still like to be able to pull a
50 lb bow back in the final decade of my
life. And when you think about all those
things you want to accomplish, if we
were then to sort of codify them into a
bunch of exercises or areas of your
health that you had to now be thinking
about that I needed to be thinking
about, what are the most important
things? So, I'm a 32-year-old. What are
what are the most important parts of my
health that I should be thinking about
if I want to achieve all the things that
I said to you in my final decade? No one
in the final decade of their life ever
said, "I wish I had less strength and I
wish I I wish I had less endurance." So,
you cannot be too strong and you cannot
be too fit. The only time that one would
throttle back on the pursuit of those is
a if doing so is come at the expense of
something else either with respect to
your health or your life and two if the
pursuit of that at such an extreme level
produces risk of injury. Okay. So in
other words, could I be stronger than I
am today? Yes. Uh I'll give you an
example. We know that in resistance
training, the sweet spot for pure
strength is one to five
reps. When your goal is to maximize
strength, you need to be pushing 1 2 3 4
five reps. Once you start thinking about
hypertrophy, muscle size, we're starting
to think about 7 8 9 10 11 12 reps. Once
we start thinking about muscular
endurance, we start thinking about north
of 15, right? Those are the general
patterns of resistance training. So, if
I want to build my muscles because I'm
going for aesthetic goals, then I need
to be aiming above five reps. I need to
be 10 or 12. But if I'm just purely
thinking about strength, bigger weights,
but lower reps. That's exactly right.
Okay. And then if I got muscular
endurance, which be even higher reps.
Okay. Lower weight. Yep. Okay. So,
again, we could go into much more detail
around that, but just to finish the
point here, why do I not do much
training at one to five reps? In fact,
these days I don't do any training at 1
to five reps anymore.
Why? Because to train at 1 to five reps
comes at a risk. Okay? Especially for
heavy compound movements. So
like I'm, you know, I'm okay getting a
little bit less of a strength benefit
while still of course getting stronger,
but training at a higher rep load. So
I'm typically so I'm targeting 8 to 12
reps with one to two reps in reserve is
basically how I'm doing my resistance
training. That means every set I'm doing
I would expect to get to within about
one rep of failure somewhere. So today
when I lifted I don't think I did less
than seven. I didn't do more than 12.
And the weight was always titrated so
that I was either failing, almost
failing, or one rep away from failing
somewhere in there. And I was adjusting
the weight constantly on every exercise
to get there with the exception of one
exercise. I did. Push-ups was one of the
things I did. Push-ups are kind of more
in the muscle endurance. Obviously, I'm
doing more reps when I was doing
push-ups, but pretty much everything
else was in that range. So again, I'm
not fully maximizing strength anymore
because the cost of it might be a little
bit high in terms of injury risk.
Similarly, I'm not strength training
24/7 because I need to make time to do
my endurance training and other types of
training. How often do you train uh
resistance training? I resistance
training three times a week. And how
often do you train generally? And I
train every day. Every day. Yeah. Why?
Because, you know, again, the the
intensity of my training is not that
high. At least three days a week. So the
three resistance days are pretty hard
because I'm really only doing each body
part once a week. So when I'm doing it,
I'm really I'll spend that 90 minutes
really kind of hammering those body
parts. Three of those days are just zone
two. So, my three three of my four
cardio days are zone two days where I'm
doing, you know, I'm on a bike and I am
riding at a level of intensity that
actually allows me to still talk some,
you know, not not talk like I am now,
but talking in a sort of a strained way.
So, for me, that's about a heart rate of
140 beats per minute. And that's just
not that's just not taking a huge toll
on me. like that. Those are almost like
recovery days for me. And then one day a
week I do a a really really hard V2 max
day and that's that's a really hard day.
That burns a lot of matches. That's
tomorrow. Not looking forward to it
already. Do you do cardio on your
resistance training days as well? No, I
don't. So, it's the seven day. It's four
days of cardio, three days of uh of
resistance. Now, that's going to change
in the summer when I'm going to add 3
days of swimming. Um, and I will end up
doing some swims on some resistance
days. So, before you do your resistance
workout, you don't go on the stepper for
20 minutes or cycle for 20 minutes or
something. I don't. Is there a
particular reason why? It wouldn't
really serve a purpose. Um, I So, I I
know a lot of people do that. I know a
lot of people will say, "Hey, I'm going
to do a little bit of a warm up on this
treadmill or the stepmaster before I
lift." But I actually have a pretty
strong point of view on how we should
warm up to lift. And I don't think
walking on the treadmill or running on
the treadmill or being on the
stairmaster or on the bike is a great
prep for the lift. I think it's better
to warm up for a lift doing movements
that prepare you to lift. So for
example, like if it's a leg day, so
Monday's leg day, right? So what am I
going to do? I'm going to start by doing
a bunch of core stabilizing stuff. So,
I'm going to do a whole bunch of this
dynamic neuromuscular stabilization
stuff. So, you get into basically these
baby positions and you really learn to
activate your core as you move around in
a six-month position and stuff like
that. I then do a whole bunch of um like
do you know what a 9090 is or a shinbox
exercise is um where you're you're kind
of on the ground in a position where
you're really is you know uh you can
start out doing it isometrically but
ultimately going through uh a slow
eccentric and concentric phase of
movement that's kind of activating
glutes. So I go through basically a
whole DNS sequence. Then I get into a
dynamic movement prep. So then I get
into a bunch of bouncing, a bunch of
footwork. Um, and then I start with
really light weights. So I'll go to a
leg extension machine and do very, very
light leg extensions, very, very light
leg curls. Come back and do more jumping
and moving and lunging and go back and
forth. So I'll spend 20 minutes doing a
warm-up, but the warm-up is geared for
me to lift. Whereas if I had just sat on
a bike and pedal around, that doesn't
actually replicate any of the movements
I'm going to do when I start loading
myself. I've got particularly concerned
about injury. Yeah. Now that I'm 32,
because when I was bloody 20, I could do
almost anything, it seemed, and nothing
would break. But I had a couple of
injuries when doing like shoulder
presses and things like that. And one of
my friends had a similar injury recently
which took him out for three or four
months where he did a shoulder press,
pulled something in his back or
something, his like neck. Yeah. And then
he couldn't like turn his head anymore.
In terms of
injury, if I wanted to get injured, am I
right in thinking that the the thing
that leads to injury is basically just
walking straight in and trying to lift
something heavy? Or is there things
further upstream that cause injury in
the gym? No, there's I mean that's one
way to increase your risk of injury for
sure. Uh but but yes, there are other
ways that it can happen and I think
about it a lot. I mean one of the
injuries I think a lot about are calf
injuries, Achilles injuries, sort of
tendon injuries. This is, I think, one
of the things that becomes a real
problem for people as they age. You
know, you you often hear about people my
age, uh, tearing an Achilles. It's a
devastating injury. Now, again, it's not
devastating in that you won't recover
from it, but boy, it's going to take you
out of commission for 6 months. So, a
lot of these injuries happen because the
individual still has strength, um, but
they've they've kind of lost some of the
pliability in the tendon because they've
kind of lost some of the jumping. That's
why I always start these workouts with
low level of jumping and I'll progress
to higher levels of jumping. But jumping
is actually a very important part of
training and it's one of the things that
we take for granted. But boy, when your
ability to jump is gone, and jumping, by
the way, can mean like just initiating a
jump. But it can also mean jumping off
something and stopping yourself. Those
are really important skills. And so like
something like jumping rope is really
important, right? Your feet are just
kind of moving like that. They're
they're acting as shock absorbers. Calfs
and Achilles have to constantly change
in length. And that accommodation is a
really important part of resilience. And
I think that should that should be an
important part of everybody's warm-up at
a minimum, if not part of their workout.
One thing I'd love you to do is to
persuade people listening that muscle
mass matters for longevity because
um and also if you can within that that
leg day matters because we all avoid leg
day including me and sometimes I need to
be told again why why it matters for me
to add it. Well, I mean, I think look,
muscle mass
um is is probably the second most highly
uh correlated finding uh or third most
to longevity after strength and
cardiorespiratory fitness V2 max. So,
why is that? Um so, first of all, I
think that muscle mass is both directly
a proxy for strength in general. The
more muscle you have, the stronger you
are. We all know exceptions to that. We
know wiry little people who are insanely
strong. And I have patients like that.
They're just naturally, you know, thin
people. But when we put them through the
testing
protocols, you know, they're remarkable
in terms of their strength. And I tend
to not worry about the fact that they're
slight in build when when I see that
they're strong across the board. There
is another benefit of muscle mass which
is it's the place where you dispose of
glucose. So from a metabolic
perspective, the more muscle mass you
have, the more glucose buffering
capacity you have. And why does that
matter as I age? Because you know, one
of the hallmarks of aging is a reduction
in the capacity to metabolize and buffer
glucose. And so as as glucose levels
become less and less regulated, all
sorts of bad things happen. uh bad
things happen to micro vessels in the
body. So we if you think of the most
extreme example of this is type two
diabetes. So once a person has type two
diabetes, what are they at risk for?
They're at the risk of reduced vision
and ultimately blindness, amputations of
their digits, impetence, right? The
penis has tons of tiny blood vessels in
it and the more that you know
glycosillated proteins accumulate there,
the less they get blood flow and
obviously damage to the small blood
vessels of the brain as well. So all of
these things are hugely problematic when
glucose is disregulated. And again, the
most important thing that you can do to
regulate glucose in addition to the
obvious, which is eating energy balance,
not eating too much, is making sure you
have large insulin sensitive muscles,
which means large muscles in the context
of an individual who's sleeping well and
exercising. And you're going to
basically have a great place to put all
of that glucose when you consume it. And
is that going to save off me getting
belly fat because my glucose is going to
be stored in the muscles as opposed to
somewhere else or again it all depends
on the total energy balance. But yes,
it's clearly going to make a difference,
right? So one of the shest ways to um
reduce your capacity to store fat is to
add more muscle. Okay. Um I I did the
grip strength test. I've done it twice
now. And meaning you did one of the like
grip meters or you did a hanging test.
The uh one of the grip grip meters.
actually did it at Brian Johnson's house
and then I but I also did it with Andy
Galpin and people tell me it's a
indicator of longevity but I've never
really understood why is it just testing
my strength. Yeah. Um grip strength of
all the strength metrics it's one of the
most highly correlated with longevity.
We actually prefer to do it like at 10
squared where your colleagues tested
yesterday. We prefer to do it on a dead
hang. So, we make them hang from a bar.
Um, and we just time how long they can
hang. So, that that's a really good
metric of your grip strength because
it's also normalized to your weight.
Okay. So, uh, so we we want to see that
people can hang for at least two minutes
on a bar. And so, the question is why is
that so highly correlated with
longevity? And it's what you said. It's
it's it's strength. Uh, and the reason
for it is it's really hard to be strong
anywhere in the upper body if your grip
is weak. Like if you think about being
able to push, especially being able to
pull, like all of the real metrics of
upper body strength require a strong
grip. And if you have a strong grip, you
have a strong hand, you have a strong
forearm, you have a strong scapula that
is connected to your rib cage, like it
goes up the whole chain. That's another
reason why we like the dead hang as a
way to test it because the dead hang is
testing everything. It's testing your
actual grip. It's testing your scapular
stabilization, the stability of your
shoulder. It's basically testing that
entire chain. And then I also think
there's a practical side of this, right?
when when you know it's very
underappreciated what frailty does to an
aging individual and what sarcopenia
loss of muscle mass does to an aging
person and and what it is about falling
that is so devastating to an older
person and the stronger your grip the
easier you're able to navigate a lot of
those things right it just seems
unthinkable that falling is something I
should be thinking about at 32 in the
future like cuz my seems ridiculous it
seems ridiculous yeah and yet it is
devastating. So once you reach the age
of
65, which that ain't that far. I mean,
if you you know 65 year olds all day
long, that does that's not a that's not
a very old person. Yeah. Once you reach
the age of 65, your mortality from a
fall that results in a broken hip or
femur is 15 to 30%. Think just think
that is such a staggering number. So,
you're over 65, you fall, and that fall
results in the break of a femur or hip.
There's a 15 to 30% chance you'll be
dead within a year. What kills me? It
could be something very acute like you
bang, you know, the fall that's
significant enough to do that also bangs
your head. It could be that you get a
fat embolism, you get a blood clot. It
could be that, you know, during the
recovery process of this, you just never
really get better. You never thrive
again. I think a more disturbing
statistic is that of all the people who
survive, 50% will never again regain the
level of function they had before the
injury. Wow. So they will require a cane
for the rest of their life or something
like that. Um now there are lots of
things that account for that. Andy
Galpin, who you mentioned a moment ago,
talks a lot about this, but it's a lot
of it comes down to foot explosiveness,
power. So the reason you're not really
afraid of falling like when was the last
time you were walking and you your your
foot caught something and you you
slipped like yesterday. Yeah, quite
often. Yeah, exactly. Why don't you fall
when that happens? Because I can quickly
readjust, right? That's power. Okay, so
you have the power in your foot to
readjust when you lose your step. You
step off a curb not realizing it, it
doesn't matter. You readjust. Okay,
those are a very very specific muscle
fiber that is responsible for that. It's
called the type 2B muscle fiber. That is
the first fiber that atrophies when you
age. In fact, you're already at your
peak. It's all downhill from where you
are now. Thank you so much. Yes. So, I'm
I'm already 20 years past you and my
power is a fraction of what it was 20
years ago. Now, I fight like hell based
on the exercises I do to try to make to
try to keep it as high as possible. So
the reason that these, you know, people
who are in their 70s are falling all the
time is people think it's a balance
thing. It's not just a balance thing,
right? It's that they're undergoing the
same insult you and I undergo on a daily
basis. But the difference is their
probability of being able to catch it
either through the explosiveness of
their foot or their lower leg coupled
with maybe not being able to grab onto
something as quickly and adjust. Uh it's
a power deficit problem. So, what do I
have to train now at 32 to ensure that
specifically the example of hitting
something and quickly being able to
adjust? Um, I'm able to do that when I'm
70. I think jumping is a great way to do
this, right? So, so I mean I use certain
specialized pieces of equipment that
actually have power built into it
because power is different from
strength, right? So, strength is really
the ability to is is just the ability to
move a force independent of the speed at
which you move it. Power is the maximum
combination of force and speed. Okay? So
if you on the on the on the um x axis if
you were to put force and on the y-axis
if you were to put power the curve is an
inverted u. So as the force or the
weight that you're moving goes up and
you're trying to move it as fast as you
can, you're getting more and more and
more and more power. But then at some
point the weight gets so heavy that even
as you continue to move it, it's going
slower and slower and slower. So your
power is going down. So there's a sweet
spot there. So one of the things I do is
there's certain specialized pieces of
equipment that allow you to train in
that way. So I definitely rely on a lot
of those. But even if you don't have
access to that machine, jumping is a
really important way to generate power.
So if you're just doing a vertical jump,
that's a that's power. What about
balance? I I was at Brian Johnson's
house and as he was cooking his I don't
know breakfast or lunch or whatever, he
was balancing on a half
ball. You've seen one of those things.
Yeah. Yeah. I I don't think I asked him
why he was balancing on it, but I assume
it was to do with balance and the
certain muscles in the in the leg. There
are lots of exercises that are great for
balance. Um, anything that produces
instability is great because it's uh,
you know, for lack of a better term,
I've heard it described as problem
solving for your foot. Okay? Right? So,
so if you think about being on any
unstable surface, even if you're just
walking on an unstable surface, so if
you if you were to look at a person's
foot, their lower leg actually, as
they're walking on a surface that's
constantly changing, so like a gravel
path or something like that, you're
going to see like if this were my lower
leg, you would see the musculature of
the lower leg constantly adjusting to
it. And so, yeah, I'm I really enjoy
things that force that type of training.
Do you do flexibility stuff? Yeah. So,
I'm actually naturally a pretty lax
person. So, I don't do any stretching if
that's what you're asking. But all of
the sort of stability and dynamic stuff
I do incorporates movement at end
ranges. So,
um I I'll give you an example of why I
think the notion of flexibility might be
a little bit misunderstood. If you ask a
person to stand up and with their legs
straight touch their toes, most people
would say that's a great test of
flexibility in the hamstring, right? And
most people can't do that. What they
don't realize is everybody's hamstrings
are long enough to allow them to do
that. The reason they can't do it is
their central nervous system will not
release them to do it. Does that make
sense? Interesting. The central nervous
system won't release them to do it.
That's right. It doesn't feel safe for
them to do it. Now, how do I know this?
Because if you take a person under
general
anesthesia, you can put them into almost
any position possible. So, if you took a
person under general anesthesia, laid
them on the operating room table, you
could lift their leg up to
here. When they're awake, you couldn't
get it past here. When they wake up from
surgery, will they have a torn
hamstring? Not at all. They won't even
know their leg was moved. The difference
is when they're under general
anesthesia, their brain is not sending a
signal to the leg that says don't lift.
So why is the why is the leg why is the
brain doing that to the individual? This
is how I learned it on a personal level.
So about six years ago, I had tweaked my
back and had just done a, you know,
unnecessarily heavy set of deadlifts and
just pushed it a little too far. And I
was kind of nursing this this sort of,
you know, just very very tight QL. I was
completely jammed up. And I came in to
to do some training with a friend of
mine who's one of the guys that actually
he is really the guy that introduced me
to this thing called DNS, dynamic
neuromuscular stabilization. And I mean,
I was stiff as a board. I couldn't, you
know, get past my knees bending forward
and I'd been hurting for like three
days. And we went through a series of
exercises
for 40 minutes, which included me laying
on my back with my legs up, him leaning
on top of me, so my feet are here on his
chest and doing isomemmetric pushes
while working on uh generating
intraabdominal pressure. And after an
yeah maybe 40 minutes of this type of
exercises, I was palms on the
floor. Now, how do I go from not being
able to get to my knees to palms on the
floor in 40 minutes with three days of
horrible back pain? The difference is
when I my back was hurting, it was my
body was not going to let me go down,
right? The body was saying, "No way.
your back. I'm protecting you because
you were you are not stable. You're not
going to go any further. And what we
went through with this exercise and a
series of exercises was basically I mean
I'm oversimplifying this and sort of
anthropomorphizing it, but letting my
brain know it's okay. You're stable.
You're stable. You're stable. The back
is safe. The back is safe. Let him go.
And then ah I'm palms on the floor. So I
love testing this. Sometimes I'll just
wake up in the morning and do five
minutes of breathing exercises when I'm
stiff as a board and just get into a you
know position on the floor. Why the
breathing breathing exercises? Because
that's really how it's the it's the the
breathing is how I kind of create this
cylinder in my abdomen to sort of push
the you know push the the the floor of
the cylinder down as the pelvic wall.
The diaphragm is the se cylinder uh the
top and then the the entire you know
entirety of my abdomen is the wall of
the cylinder. And so I kind of go
through these exercises every single
day, usually on my back actually. That's
kind of like part of my warm-up and and
it's just a way to kind of ground myself
around creating uh concentric pressure
in the abdomen. Just to get some tips
from you around your your strength
training regime. Um how many exercises
do you do? What does I'm really curious.
So you train three days a week doing
strength and resistance stuff.
Do you do like shoulders and back and um
as like a pet like you know people it's
just totally Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. So on
Monday Monday is uh is pure lower body.
Okay. And uh uh Wednesday is arms and
shoulders and Friday is uh chest and
back. Okay. Super simple like nothing
nothing no rocket science. An hour uh I
mean it's it's a like an hour and a half
of lifting play plus maybe 20 minutes of
the warm-up stuff. So on the chest and
back day, how many chest exercises are
you doing? Four. Four. Okay. And then
four on back. Yeah. Okay. And I just I'm
just super setting them. And I'm going
to do maybe five sets of each. So five
working sets. So there's a lot of
warm-up in there, too. Um and I'll also
do some other stuff like some medball
slams or things like that as well.
There's been this huge rise in people
doing these um high roxes and sort of
elite endurance events and and such.
really interesting that it's become so
popular. Even things like running clubs,
I know, but the fact that people are
more people are doing marathons now than
ever before. Why do you think this is
happening? I don't know. I mean, I think
it's a very net positive thing, though.
I mean, I I I I do think that there's um
more and more people that are taking up
things like rucking and running and and
you know, finding camaraderie in these
things. The only thing I hope is that
that people are doing it in a manner
that's sustainable and safe and allows
them to do it indefinitely. So I, you
know, I just I'm always hopeful that
whatever thing that people are doing,
they're not injuring themselves cuz
again, rule number one is don't get
injured. So So you're, you know, you're
you're you're playing uh you're playing,
you want the game, the name of the game
is to play the game as long as possible.
In front of me, I have a bunch of
different graphs and images. Um, and
they some of them relate to a word you
said earlier on, which is V2 max. And
this is something I've heard you talk
about previously, but for anyone that
doesn't understand what V2 max is or why
it's important, um, can you explain what
it is and why it's so critical to
longevity and health span? I think most
people will be familiar with the idea
that we are obligate anorobes, which in
English means we cannot survive without
oxygen.
Okay. So why is that?
So oxygen is absolutely essential to
catalyze the chemical reaction that
turns food into a currency for energy
called
ATP. So everybody's probably heard of
ATP. ATP is the money, the currency of
energy in our body. Anything that
interrupts the production of ATP is
fatal. So an extreme example of that is
cyanide. Everyone's heard of cyanide as
a poison. If you take cyanide, you'll be
dead within seconds because cyanide
blocks one of the transporters in the
production of ATP. So that just gives
you a sense of how critical it is to
have an infinite and abundant supply of
ATP. Oxygen is also essential for that.
That's why without oxygen, you can only
survive for a couple of minutes. Longer
than you can without cyanide, but not
much longer. So how does it work?
So we breathe in air and that air goes
into our lungs and that air goes through
our lungs into these distal things
called capillaries where hemoglobin is
bringing the waste product called carbon
dioxide back to the lungs. And there's a
gradient of of partial pressure between
oxygen and carbon dioxide such that a
switch takes place. The air that we
breathe in delivers some of its oxygen
to the hemoglobin molecules and the
carbon dioxide diffuses off that into
the air and we breathe out air that is
lower in oxygen and higher in carbon
dioxide than what we breathed in. Mhm.
So if I go that was high oxygen, low
carbon
dioxide, that was low oxygen, high
carbon dioxide. And that's the that's
happening every second of every day.
That oxygen, that hemoglobin molecule
that's carrying oxygen is carrying it to
every cell in my body because every cell
in my body needs
oxygen. And that cell in the body is
taking the oxygen to run that chemical
reaction to make ATP. and it's shuttling
back carbon dioxide. And it's just the
most incredible thing in the world to
imagine how frequently this is
happening. And the more you exercise,
the more you consume oxygen. So oxygen
consumption is a proxy for energy
demand. So we can measure this. Now to
do so, you have to put a mask on because
I have to be able to measure very
precisely two things.
I have to be able to measure exactly the
flow rate of air going in and out of
your mouth and I have to be able to
measure very precisely the concentration
of oxygen coming out. If I know those
two things, I can calculate how many
lers per minute of oxygen you are
consuming.
So you and I sitting here right now are
probably
consuming less than half a liter a
minute. So call it 500 cc a minute of
oxygen right now because you have to
consume some to be alive. And look, I'm
moving my arms around and you're nodding
and taking notes. So, you know, if
you're sleeping, you might be consuming
300 milliliters of oxygen per minute.
That's that's the lowest level.
If you were to get up and we were to
walk around here, that number might go
up to 800 milliliters uh per minute. If
we were to walk a little more briskly,
we might be at a liter per minute of
oxygen. If I said, "Let's go out in the
parking lot and jog." Well, we might get
up to like 1.5 L per minute. we pick up
the pace a little bit, we'll get to two
liters per minute. If I start really,
really running us hard, we're going to
get to three and a half, four liters per
minute. Well, at some point, I am going
to push you so hard that you will
achieve your maximum level of oxygen
consumption. And if I push you any
harder and faster, you won't extract
more oxygen from the air. You may go
faster but you will do so through a
process that does not involve the
consumption of oxygen. You will do do so
through an anorobic glycolytic pathway
but you will have achieved your maximum
consumption of oxygen. And that number
has a very special name. It's called V2
max. So V2 max measured in liters per
minute is the maximum amount of oxygen
you can consume. And the only way you
can measure that again is to have this
mask with very very fancy apparatus that
measures both of those things I said.
And you have to be stressed hard. So we
typically do this on a treadmill or on a
bike. So your your your colleagues that
came into 10 squared yesterday, they did
it on treadmills. They ran and they ran
them and ran them and they ran them
until they couldn't go any faster. And
then we measured how many liters per
minute of oxygen they were consuming.
Now that answers what V2 max is. So the
next question is does this matter? Well
the short answer is we don't have a
single metric of humans that we can
measure that better predicts how long
they will live than how high their V2
max
is.
And it's not even close to be completely
clear. So if you compare somebody who is
in the top 2% to someone who is in the
bottom 25% for their age uh the
difference in mortality is 5x 500%. Yes.
400% technically because with hazard
ratios you you you go two two a 2x
hazard ratio is 100% I guess. Yeah. So
let's look at you. So I see you've
pulled this chart out which is one of my
favorite charts. Okay. So you Oh, by the
way, there's one other thing I should
state. We normalize this by weight.
Okay. Okay. So, we always divide that
number of liters per minute by how many
kilograms you are. So, the number is
actually reported as milliliters per
kilogram per minute. Okay.
Okay. All right. So if we look at
somebody who is your age, male 30 to
39, if their V2 max is below 35
milliliters per kilogram per minute,
they are in the bottom
25%. Conversely, if they are at 53
milliliters per kilogram per minute,
they are in the top two and a half
percent.
So to be clear, if you take a
35-year-old man and one of them has a V2
max of 53 and the other one has a V2 max
of
35, there is a
400% difference in their all-c cause
mortality over the coming year. Wow.
Okay. So all cause mortality, anything
killing them over the coming year.
That's right. Now, this becomes more and
more profound as you age because
the all cause mortality ratio for a
35-year-old is incredibly low. Yeah,
it's like 1%. So, that means you're
comparing 1% to 4%. It's not that big a
deal. But when you get up to my age, so
I'm two decades older than you. So now
the low bar, the bottom quartile is less
than
29. The high bar is more than 50.
Well, my relative mortality in the next
decade is probably 2 to 3%. So now
multiply that by four. Okay. When I get
into my marginal decade, the low bar is
18. The high bar is
36. That's a 2x difference in V2 max. A
4x difference in mortality is huge. when
the all-c cause mortality for an 85y old
is going to
be, you know, the one-year annual, you
know, the one-year mortality for that
person is, you know, more than 10%.
Yeah. So, one of the things that we do
is we sort of think through this not
just through the lens of mortality,
which is what I just walked you through
here, but also health span, which is
kind of what you were talking about
earlier with the graph of strength and
disability. So we have another figure
that we show people that um on the x
axis shows age. Yeah. And on the y ais
shows
V2. And it has a whole bunch of lines
that come across that show various
activities. You know, if you want to be
able to run a six-minute mile, you have
to have a V2 that's very high. If you
want to be able to run an 8-minute mile,
a 10-minute mile. If you want to be able
to climb a flight of stairs without
getting out of breath, like it shows all
of these different things. And you see
what the required V2 is. Mhm. I think in
fact we might even have these graphs in
here.
Yeah. Right there. So we put your dot on
the graph and we say if you stay where
you are, you're meaning right at that
green curve, you're in for a great life.
Why? Because even when you're in your
80s, you're still going to be able to do
all of those things. So the results
you're looking at here are Jack's
results. Yep. Who runs the production
here. He came to your center. Yep. Came
to 10 squared in Austin. He did the
test. I think he was on the treadmill
for like an hour or something like that.
And can you explain to me exactly what
his results say as it relates to what
you were just describing? Yeah. So he
did both a zone 2 and a V2 max test. So
Jack got on the treadmill and you know
there's a protocol for how you warm
somebody up. really want them to be able
to get to a maximum effort. You don't
just put them on a treadmill and crank
it up. You take you take your time
getting them up there. And he had an
amazing result. So, his V2 max was 4.1
lers per minute. And he achieved that at
a heart rate of 204 beats per minute,
which is higher than what was predicted
for his age. If you normalize it by his
weight, he was at
56.5 milliliters per kilogram per
minute. So when you look at his age,
because he's in his 20s, he was at about
the 97th percentile for his age, meaning
his V2 max was higher than 97% of people
his age.
And uh so out of the gate that just
tells us from a longevity standpoint,
our goal is to keep him there as long as
possible. I mean, we're so ambitious
with our patients and clients that we
actually want them to be as as an
aspiration to be two decades younger at
the top 2%.
So if you're 50, you want to be V2 max
north of 53. And then the other thing we
do is we check on something called heart
rate recovery. So in 60 seconds post V2
max, how long does it take uh how many
beats does their heart rate come down in
one minute? This is also a very powerful
predictor of mortality because it's a
huge indication of what's called
parasympathetic sympathetic balance. So,
it's basically a question of how does
the how how much is their autonomic
nervous system in favor of sort of a
stress response versus a recovery
response. And so, the gold standard
here, we want to see people that can
recover at least 30 beats in the first
minute. He did pretty well. He recovered
28 beats. You know, if you're really,
really fit, you're going to be 40, 50
beats of recovery within the first um
one minute. It's incredible. Incredible.
Then we tested his um lactate levels and
we ran him for what we called zone 2
testing. Right? So zone 2 is his aerobic
base. This is where he should be
spending 80% of his training. 80% of his
cardio training time should be in this
energy system. So it's hard enough that
it's not just pure recovery, but not so
hard that it's, you know, uh pushing
energy systems that are that are higher.
This is this is a pace he should be able
to hold for an hour and he should
certainly feel like he's working but not
feel it too much. Technically it's also
a place where he's prod he's got maximum
fat oxidation. So we do this also in the
same measure on a treadmill. This is a
bit more of a complicated test because
you're titrating between how he feels
and what his blood lactate levels are.
Maybe not to get too complicated in the
weeds on that, but we're simultaneously
looking at the ratio of how much carbon
dioxide he produces to how much oxygen
he consumes. That tells us how much fat
he is using in his own body. And we look
at that number and he maxed out
at.77 grams per minute, which is very
good. One gram per minute of fat
oxidation is exceptional. So
7677 is pretty darn good. His lactate
hit about 2 mill and he achieved this
running at 7.3 miles hour. So So again,
that's there there's a lot to unpack in
there, but that gives us a pretty good
sense of his level of fitness. And for a
guy in his 20s, um that's that's really
good fitness. He does a lot of running.
Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And and but even
this test is a body of work. We normally
would separate these two tests on two
separate days. Okay. So people, you
know, the the people who come to 10
squared are not from Austin. They're
from all over the place. So they come in
for two days of testing. And you got to
sort of figure out a way to take a
person who's not necessarily that fit
and and allow them to do these tests. So
it's kind of broken up over to a couple
days so they can mix it with the
strength testing and all the other
stuff. And if you were advising Jack on
how to improve some of these scores
here, what would you say? So the truth
of the matter is looking at his stuff
here I would say I think you've got the
endurance thing really covered in his
case there were other issues that were
uncovered during his intake that were of
more concern and this is a matter of
like now what we think of as portfolio
management right so when your V2 max is
in the top 2% when your fat oxidizing 7
you know almost8 grams per minute and
he's got a heart rate of 165 to 170 when
he's um in zone 2 I mean this Guys,
cardio is dialed in. Bad skin. I've had
it and I'm sure many of you listening
have had it, too. Or maybe you have it
right now. I know how draining it can
be, especially if you're in a job where
you're presenting often like I am. So,
let me tell you about something that's
helped both my partner and me and my
sister, which is red light therapy. I
only got into this a couple of years
ago, but I wish I'd known a little bit
sooner. I've been using our show
sponsors Bon Chargar's infrared sauna
blanket for a while now, but I just got
hold of their red light therapy mask as
well. Red light has been proven to have
so many benefits for the body. Like any
area of your skin that's exposed will
see a reduction in scarring, wrinkles,
and even blemishes. It also helps with
complexion. It boosts collagen, and it
does that by targeting the upper layers
of your skin. And Bon Charge ships
worldwide with easy returns and a
year-long warranty on all of their
products. So, if you'd like to try it
yourself, head over to
bondcharge.com/diary and use code diary
for 25% off any product sitewide. Just
make sure you order through this link.
boncharge.com/diary with code diary.
I've got a story that I think you'll be
interested in hearing, and it's brought
to you by my show sponsor, Fiverr. About
6 months ago, my team and I sat down to
try and work out how we were going to
build the most valuable newsletter for
ambitious entrepreneurs ever. And after
hours of discussion, we finally agreed
that to tip the odds in our favor, we
needed to be constantly experimenting.
But to do this, we needed man power or
woman power. So we hired a group of
freelancers through Fiverr and tasked
them with testing different elements,
which are like the visuals in the
newsletter, the subject lines, the copy
links. And even after launching 100
CEOs, the new newsletter, and getting
93,000 signups on the first day, our
experimenting hasn't stopped. I'm
confident we wouldn't have seen the same
success had we not experimented in this
way. And our freelance support from
Fiverr was critical to that. So next
time you're launching something, find
your failures and fix them fast with
Fiverr freelancers. Visit
fiverr.com/diary today and use code doc
for 10% off your first order. These are
Jack's results. So I've invited Jack in
because I feel like he might have some
questions and you might have some
questions. So you guys go ahead. All
right. Well, uh, first off, Jack, thanks
for being an awesome guinea pig
yesterday. You hit it out of the park,
um, as far as your cardio training. So,
tell me a little bit like what are you
what are you doing for cardio? How often
are you running? So, I actually stripped
it back quite a lot. I probably started
maybe maybe like two years ago going
really heavy on running and that's all I
did. And then I started getting a little
bit injured. So, now I've cut it back,
but I'd say I do like one long run a
week and that's like 20k. Outside of
that, I don't really do much other
cardio. Interesting. I I know that the
team talked to you about your left foot.
Yes. And did did they show you the
pictures on the treadmill? They did.
Yeah. That's super interesting. Super
interesting. I sprained my ankle really
badly like 6 months ago. Y said that
could have been something. I think it's
very likely that the ankle sprain has
not has changed your gate such that you
probably are going to develop an injury
over time with your running. if the if
your pattern is not corrected. So,
you're overcompensating on the left and
did I I assume that I assume you noticed
the difference in the height of your
shoulders and your head and everything
while you were running. So, even though
the engine is working insanely well,
this test only measures the performance
of your engine, your chassis, which is a
subjective assessment to use the car
analogy shows that the chassis is a bit
weak. Okay, I'll give a bit of context
on what that actually was. So, when I
was running on the treadmill, um I think
it was Kyler was it? He he showed me a
picture afterwards of me running and
basically my head was right in the
middle. When I went on my right side,
but then when I went on my left, my
whole body was like a bit lopsided. Y So
yeah, that's kind of what you're talking
about there. That's right. And again,
like the good news about running is each
step is very light. Mhm. But if you're
running 20k, that's a lot of steps. So
even something that's a light impact but
done thousands of times will produce a
problem. Okay, so let's shift from how
well the engine is, which is exceptional
at both ends. By the way, to be clear,
your peak engine output, which is V2
max, was awesome, and your engine
efficiency, which was your zone 2, your
fat oxidation, exceptional. We do have
this issue on the chassis that needs to
be addressed or you're going to get a
repetitive strain injury. Mhm. Um, so
then the next thing that the the team
did was just a very simple test called
the DEEXA scan, but we we do a more
comprehensive one. So we're looking at
all the bone density, left hip, right
hip, lumbar, spine, and then total body
fat, total muscle mass, and then
visceral fat, which is fat around the
organs. I think the most surprising
aspect of the test was your bone
density. So, um, a DEXA scan, uh,
measures bone density very accurately
and both, uh, sort of across the board
in terms of your your lumbar spine and
your right hip and your left hip, you
were in your in your lumbar spine two
standard deviations below the mean for
someone your age. So, that means
basically you're in the bottom 10
percentile of bone density for a guy
your age. And for your hips, you're not
much better. Both on the left and right
hip, you're about 1 and a half to 1.7
standard deviations below the
mean. So what does that mean? That means
that you're at you you already have
something called osteoporosis. So when
your T-core, which in your case is
almost the same as your zcore because of
your age, but the zcore compares you to
someone your age. The t-core compares
you to someone 30 years old. So when
your T-core is minus1 um you have
osteopenia and when it gets below minus
2.5 you have osteoporosis. Those are
just technical definitions of bone
density. The problem is your risk of
bone fracture goes up really
significantly. Now because of how young
you are. It's not like I'm worried
you're going to walk out of here and
something's going to go wrong. But the
risk of you sustaining an injury in
sport is is not trivial. Right? If you
were out skiing and Steven was out
skiing, assuming he had normal bone
density, and you guys both took a
tumble, I would be infinitely more
worried about your bone density. And we
have patients in our practice who do.
They're young, healthy people, and they
get these freakish fractures while
skiing or playing sports and things like
that and they have really low bone
density. So, so one, it's just something
we want to address. The bigger concern
is that what's what is the what is the
story of this going to be when you're 60
and 65 and 70? And that's that's the one
where we really want to mitigate it. So,
I know that the team talked to you about
making sure you follow up with an
endocrinologist. You want to make sure
that there's nothing here that is
medically obvious to be treated, such as
vitamin D deficiency, anything that has
to do with parathyroid hormone or
calcium and things that are, you know,
medically obvious to treat. Um the most
important behavioral thing that a person
can do with low bone density beyond
correcting all the nutritional
deficiencies that can lead to it is
applying heavy load to the bone. So
bones are active pieces of tissue even
though we don't think of them that way
and they respond to deformation. So you
have to put strain into a bone for it to
respond and strengthen. And it's
counterintuitive that running is not
amazing at doing that. It's not bad. So
on in general, runners have better bone
density than sedentary people, but not
by much, believe it or not. Uh swimmers
and cyclists, believe it or not, tech
actually have lower bone density on
average. But resistance training with
heavy weights is is actually kind of
what is necessary. Grappling as well, by
the way. people who do jiu-jitsu,
strength training, resistance training,
those are those are the ways that you're
going to you're going to increase this.
So, I would say that was the first
finding that that that is, you know,
important and worth discussing. Do you
have any questions on that? Cuz I've got
a couple. Uh well, I think my first one
was so I I only actually started lifting
weights like properly maybe two years
ago. So, that's probably why you're
seeing that. Maybe. I mean, I guess did
you have asthma as a child or anything?
No. I know when I my mom says something
about like when I was born I had low
calcium something about low calcium they
had to put something on my teeth but I
don't know what that is exactly. Well if
you had low if if there's something that
was impacting your calcium levels when
you were little that would certainly be
a potential risk for it. Um the the our
bones are mostly formed for for males in
the early 20s for girls typically in the
late teens. So, anything that disrupted
calcium metabolism when you were young
could have played a role in this for
sure. Um, the reason I asked if you had
asthma is a lot of the times we see
folks that you know had any medical
condition that required corticosteroids,
prolonged use of corticosteroids would
be another big risk factor. Of course,
there's also genetics. So, probably
worth knowing if your parents themselves
have low bone density. Um, but but it
sounds like there's something going on
with calcium metabolism as a as a kid
that might have played a role. Um the
reason it is really important to connect
with an endocrinologist now is there are
actual medical uh treatments that can
increase bone density in addition to all
of sort of the total optimization of the
nutritional stuff vitamin D calcium
levels things of that nature and of
course the training. M are there
specific exercises I would do to
increase that or is it just an all round
kind of No, I mean I think the the if
you think about the long bones of the
body which are the the the ones that
we're basically measuring here I mean
the short bones in the spine but the
femurss and hips anything that puts
those things under deformation. So
anything from a farmer's carry to a step
up to a box squat. I mean, you know,
it's whatever you can do safely that's
loading you and placing these bones in a
manner that that forces them to to
actually undergo deformation. The way
the way and the other thing I would also
make sure of is that someone's checking
your blood levels to look at things like
testosterone and estrogen. So estrogen,
believe it or not, probably the most
important hormone besides vitamin D in
bone health. So you can think of a bone
as something with a strain gauge in it.
And as the bone is deformed, the strain
gauge sends a signal, a chemical signal
to cells that build the bone. The
chemical signal is estrogen. So the
reason women are so susceptible to
osteopenio and osteoporosis is once they
go through menopause, many of them lose
their estrogen if they're not placed on
well, they all lose their estrogen, but
if they're not placed on hormone
replacement therapy, they don't get it
back. And so they lose that chemical
signal. So women see a rapid drop off in
bone density at menopause. Peter, is
this graph accurate roughly?
Yes, this would be accurate. So, if this
is broadly accurate, what is the game
then for someone like Jack? Is it is it
building bone or is it preventing
decline? Yeah. Preventing decline. Most
of us reach our peak bone mass uh in our
20s. Okay. Yep. So, so the name of the
game is prevent it from getting any
weaker. The good news is, by the way, I
had a woman on my podcast named Belinda
Beck who studies osteoporosis. She's
she's from Australia and um she did this
amazing study there called the Lyftmore
study where she enrolled a bunch of
women with
osteoporosis who had never done any
resistance training and half of them
were randomized to the usual activities
like you know yoga and things of that
nature and then half of them were
randomized to heavy resistance training.
And the women that did the heavy
resistance training actually first of
all on DEXA saw no change in bone
density or saw a very minor reduction in
bone density compared to a significant
reduction in the women who were not
resistance training. But more
importantly on CT scans the women who
had did done the resistance training
actually showed an increase in cortical
thickening of bone suggesting that it
might even be that DEXA is not by itself
sufficient to fully assess bone health.
It assesses bone density, but not
necessarily bone health. And her
hypothesis is that these women might
actually be getting stronger bones even
if the density is going down just a
little. But either way, even if density
were sufficient, the fact that their
density went down so much less than the
others, uh, was amazing. And it's it's
actually, you know, if you can find the
video and link to it on YouTube, Belinda
Beck's lift more study. It's just an
awesome video to watch these little old
ladies walking around picking up, you
know, deadlifting their body weight and
stuff like that. Is there anything else
you wanted to ask Jack or about your
results or anything else pressing
questions you you have? Yeah, nutrition
would be a good one actually. Yeah,
calcium, vitamin D, protein, everything
that's going to support muscle mass as
well because that's the other thing that
we found here. So, we we looked at your
body fat percentage. Again, in absolute
terms, not that high, but for your age,
pretty high, right? Because you're
because you're young. So you were at the
80th percentile for your age and your
visceral fat was at the 50th percentile
for your age. We like to see so we don't
really care that much about total body
fat. We care a lot more about visceral
fat. So the fact that your visceral fat
was at the 50th percentile. Visceral fat
is the fat that's around your organs.
That's the more metabolically deranging
damaging fat. We actually we have a very
high standard. We want to see that below
the 10th percentile. I'll hit pause on
that for a second. But then to relay the
next thing that we looked at was your
muscle mass. So, we looked at the total
muscle mass in your arms and legs.
That's called your appendicular lean
mass. And then we looked at the total
fat-free mass in your body. And both of
those put you at about the 20th
percentile. So, the first question I'm
asking when I'm looking at these results
is, are you adequately muscled or
undermuscled? So, I really want to see
somebody above the 50th percentile in
muscle mass. So, you're under muscled.
The second thing I'm looking at is with
the body fat percentage where it is both
and the visceral fat is that to me I
call that overnourished. Now I don't
have blood tests to see where you are
metabolically but I want those are the
those are what I call my three
questions. Are you metabolically healthy
or not? I need a blood test to see it. I
suspect you are though based on your
zone 2. So the fact that your fat
oxidation was 77 grams per minute very
hard and your fasting lactate was 0.5
which is also very good. So my bet is
you are metabolically healthy. We would
have to do a bunch of blood tests to
confirm that, but I bet you would be.
But you are
overnourished, meaning body fat is too
high and visceral fat is too high. And
you are under muscled, your ALMI and
your FFMI are too low. So that
immediately tells me like what do you
need to be doing? You need to be eating
more protein, fewer calories, more
resistance training. You don't need to
do any more cardio. Like that's like
oversimplification, but like that's the
that's your path forward. And the last
question I had around uh I think I've
heard you speak about it before, but
it's around like the potential of what
your muscles mass can be. If you lift as
a teenager versus if you start lifting
and you're I'm 29. So if I start lifting
at like 27, the potential is a lot less,
right? Is that true or is that uh I'm
I'm I'm not sure. I think I think
genetics play a pretty big role in that.
Um, and I think, in other words, I think
that your ceiling is probably more
dictated by your genetics than it is the
age at which you started. I think if you
took a, you know, someone who was just
genetically wired to put on muscle and
they don't start lifting until they're
in their 20s, they're still going to put
on a ton of muscle. I mean, like, I've
been lifting weights my whole life since
I was 13 years old. I'm never going to
be like a monster. Like, it's just not
gonna happen, right? there's no chance
I'm ever going to be on the stage of a
bodybuilding, you know, contest. Okay.
Yeah. That's just one thing that's like
always haunted me. Well, haunted me in
the last two years. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
And now you but but but I don't again
there's you have to consider a bunch of
variables as you're lifting. Right. So,
are you training at the right intensity?
Are you training at the right frequency?
Do you have the right selection of
exercises? Is your technique correct?
So, lifting weights, it's not a uniform
term. Um, so, so you really have to dive
into that, right? So, to put on muscle,
you probably need to be doing a minimum
of 10 and I would say ideally closer to
20 sets per week per body group. The
intensity has to be sufficient. So, we
were talking about that minimum two,
ideally one rep in reserve per working
set. So, if you're if you're just doing
like three sets of 10, but you could
have done three more reps if you really
pushed, there was no training stimulus
there. I've got a question on that which
is linked to one of my friends, but it's
something I've heard you say which is
you you've said to me before that you
struggled with gaining weight. Yes. A
friend of mine says has said this to me
for the last 10 years that muscle. Yeah.
He said yeah. So he says like he even
when he eats a lot he has like feels
like he's force-feeding himself um and
it's like not natural and then when he
goes to the gym he hasn't seen the
results. Whereas for me I don't I've
never had the problem of like I I can
eat loads and then I go to the gym and I
work out and muscle comes on. So, for
those people that struggle with a eating
enough calories and then they go to the
gym and they don't feel like they're
able to gain muscle, you've you've
experienced this before, haven't you?
You've experienced people that have said
this to you. Sure. It's actually much
more common with with women than men,
but um it it's sort of focusing more on
the protein as opposed to the total
calories. I mean, you do need the
calories, but it's probably breaking
down the protein intake into smaller
servings. Um, and that for many people
just means they have to get shakes or
things like that. like they're not going
to get it through whole foods all the
time. I I I don't need to drink shakes
because I'm able to get protein through
food enough, but that shouldn't be
viewed as as something you don't want to
do. I mean, even I'm sure some of the,
you know, most successful bodybuilders
in the world just based on their protein
requirements still have to resort to
shakes. So, figuring out what it takes
to get one gram of protein per pound of
body weight and making sure you get
that, even if it takes four servings a
day, is a it should be the highest
priority. And again, you don't need more
calories at this point based on your
visceral and body fat. Um, we just need
to make sure you're getting that gram of
protein per pound of body weight. Um,
and that you're doing the you're getting
the right training stimulus in the gym.
Okay. Yeah. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you for that, Peter. I
didn't know we were going to be doing a
little consult here. I know, but it's
super fascinating. Even for me, even
though they're not my results, I learned
a ton about about that. Um the question
we don't necessarily need to go through
all of the results here for Jamaima but
how do you see women's results being
different typically as it relates to
bone density muscle mass and those
things. I was wondering if even for the
V2 max are expecting different results
for women or well we we score them on a
different curve. So the the results are
going to be a little lower and again
part of the reason is women have less
muscle all things equal and muscle is
the organ that is going to consume the
most oxygen uh I mean outside of the
brain. So, um, so you know, if you if
you took a a woman at 25 and a man at
25, there's a different threshold for
what a what the grade is on the curve.
But I would say the biggest difference
we typically see is, and not so much at
the ages of these guys because they're
both so young and fit, but as we as we
get into kind of older folks, we we
definitely see more of an issue with
muscle mass in women and bone density in
women. I was quite surprised with Jack
when you you talked about um visceral
fat. Yeah. There's two types of fat that
I've come to learn. Subcutaneous which
is I think is on the outside is and then
visceral is around the organs. Right. So
the body fat is mostly measuring his
subcutaneous fat. Oh, on the outside. Y.
Okay.
I've got a little bit of subcutaneous
fat right now. As we do all, how do I
know if it's if it's an issue or not?
Unfortunately, it's very difficult to
know without further investigation. Um,
I say this because I haven't been able
to predict it looking at somebody. Like
I've seen people who have lots of
subcutaneous fat, but when you look at
their liver and look at their visceral
fat, they have virtually none. And they
tend to be quite metabolically healthy.
So maybe aesthetically they've got too
much body fat. And there are lots of
reasons why they might want that, might
not want that, I'm sorry, based on, you
know, excess body weight that just in
general is an impediment to movement or,
you know, pain in their knees or joints.
Um, but it's not actually causing them
harm physiologically. And conversely,
you know, if you look at Jack, like he's
he actually looks he's a pretty
lean-look guy. Like nobody would look at
Jack and say he's overweight, but he's
got a little bit too much fat on the
inside. and that if not I mean I think
his running and his fitness is probably
offsetting it metabolically but there
might be come a day when that's not the
case. So it it you know this is
something that I think just needs to be
addressed and and again people that are
in their 20s can get away with a lot and
it starts to become something you don't
get away with in your 40s. Is there a
genetic component to this and also what
has caused
it? What usually causes it? the body
fat, the visceral fat. Visceral fat.
Yeah, there's definitely a genetic
component to it, but the truth of the
matter is the cause of this is is just
fuel partitioning. It's just it's just
where the body is putting excess energy,
right? So, so all of the fat we have in
our body comes down to where does our
body choose to store excess energy
because that's that's the only way we
store it. We can't store protein. So, we
can only store I mean, we store protein
technically in muscles, but we're
basically storing carbohydrates and fat.
So you can store carbohydrates
preferably in the muscle and in the
liver as glycogen, but that's a very
finite source. So most of where you're
storing those things is excess glucose
gets stored as fat and then in fat gets
stored as fat. So if theoretically if
Jack had a higher muscle mass, he would
have less visceral fat potentially.
Yeah, probably because first of all
muscle is more metabolically active. So
more metabolically active tissue means
higher energy expenditure which would
all things equal mean lower fat. That
makes sense. And if there were a couple
of things that I could do to reduce my
visceral fat, we talked about exercise
there. We talked about diet.
Intermittent fasting, do they are you
are you a fan of those kinds of things?
There's no evidence that intermittent
fasting produces any benefits above the
equivalent amount of caloric
restriction. So you know whe whether
you're eating in eight hours or six
hours or across 12 hours if the same
number of calories are consumed it's
essentially producing the same outcome.
Sleep stress absolutely dramatic. We've
talked about sleep already right if your
sleep is not good you are going to be
insulin resistant. If you are insulin
resistant, you are partitioning fuel in
an unfavorable way, which in English
means you are more likely to access
glucose than access fat even at low
levels of intensity when you should be
accessing fat. That's why, by the way, I
thought he's probably still insulin
sensitive based on how high his fat
oxidation was.
Meaning when he was at 165 beats per
minute on a treadmill, he was pulling
out almost 0.88 gram per minute of fat.
That's really good. That tells me he
fuel partitions
well. He knows how to access fat when he
needs fat. So that's that's still
working in his favor. But for many
people, once they're exercising that
hard, their their fat oxidation goes to
hell and all they're doing is accessing
glucose. But there could be a link for
in his case between sleep and visceral
fat. Yep. Especially if he travels with
you. Yeah. And then alcohol. You mean
Jack doesn't drink alcohol? But
generally visceral fat and alcohol.
Yeah. Bad sign. I want to talk to you
about this alcohol point because I saw
Huberman um tweet the other day saying
that it's now pretty well established
that even moderate alcohol intake is bad
for you. But I sat here the other day
with someone else who said to me that
they talked about the Medit
Mediterranean diet, the Italians, they
seem to be fine, etc. And I wanted to
kind of get your perspective on whether
small amounts of alcohol intake are okay
or not because some people still think
it's healthy to have moderate alcohol
intake. It's better for the heart. I
think that is pretty abundantly not
true. So I don't
think I am aware of any real evidence
and we've scrutinized the heck out of
this. We so the subscribers to our
podcast get these premium newsletters
every month where we do an ultra insane
deep dive into a topic and alcohol was
one of them. So this is like you're
getting a treaties right a 20page
research report on a topic. So uh for
anybody who's interested in that they
should go and get the alcohol piece but
I'll link it below. Yeah, the TLDDR is
that there is no compelling evidence
whatsoever that there is a health
benefit that comes from ethanol
consumption. The molecule of ethanol is
not healthy at any dose and I believe
that is unambiguously true. That said,
it does not appear to be linearly
toxic, meaning low doses, probably sub
15 gram per day. 15 grams of ethanol
would be what you would get in a
standard drink. Standard drink, not a
generous drink. So, you know, whatever.
Like 3 4 ounces of wine would be 15
grams of ethanol, 14 grams of ethanol.
It appears that for most people the
toxicity of that amount of ethanol is
very difficult to
measure. And this is where you get into
the area of for some people there might
actually be enough of a pro-social
benefit from that amount of ethanol if
consumed in an otherwise healthy
environment. Right? So if you talk about
the individual who comes home and has a
glass of wine while he's with his wife
and they kind of unwind in the backyard
and talk about their day and things like
that, there might be benefits from doing
that that outweigh the very very small
amount of toxicity that came in that
ethanol.
Once you reach about 30 grams of ethanol
a day, I don't see and I have not seen a
shred of evidence that there is any
amount of pro-social behavior that can
offset the toxicity of that ethanol. So,
while I would not go as far as the World
Health Organization, which has condemned
ethanol as a carcinogen at every dose, I
just don't see the data to make that
case for every dose.
I tell my patients in a very measured,
nuanced way, kind of what I just told
you, like, you know, I drink alcohol and
I I but I but I think about it every
time I do, like, is it worth it? Is it
worth it? Is it worth it? Like, I'm not
just drinking for the sake of drinking.
I have this expression, don't drink on
airplanes because the alcohol sucks.
Like, I'm not just drinking to numb
myself, right? Like, if I'm going to
drink, there's a reason. It's going to
be really freaking good. And that for me
amounts to probably like four drinks a
week. Just for a second, I want to talk
about a company I've invested in and who
sponsored this podcast called Zoey. Like
me, many of you are big on tracking your
fitness and your sleep. But how many of
you understand how your body handles
food? Metabolic fitness is all about
understanding your metabolism's response
to food. And we all react differently.
So Zoe created a test to help you
understand how your body responds. And
it starts with their famous test
cookies, which are identical test meals
with the same sugar, fat, and calorie
content of the average meal, and
therefore acts as a metabolic challenge.
You also wear a continuous glucose
monitor that tests your blood sugar
levels. I've done this test, and it left
me wondering how my metabolic fitness
compared to others like me, and my
results revealed everything. So, if
you'd like to learn about your body's
response to food, head over to zoey.com
to order your test kit now. And if you
want a discount, use code Stephen 10 at
checkout for 10% off your membership. As
a Zoey member, you'll get an athome test
kit and personalized nutrition program
to help you make smarter food choices
that support your health. That's zoe.com
with code
stephven10. You're just talking about
airplanes there. I was thinking about
electrolytes. There's been a huge boom
over the last couple of months year of
people consuming more and more um
electrolytes. Everyone's launching an
electrolyte drink and consuming much
more salt and sodium. What do you make
of this? Are we electrolyte deficient?
Um, well, first of all, as a disclosure,
I'm an investor in a company that sells
electrolytes, so LMT. Um, so I'm an
investor in that company, which I always
want to disclose stuff like that if it's
pertinent. Um, the short answer is it
depends. So, why did I get interested in
electrolytes? Well, I historically never
consumed electrolytes when exercising. I
was pretty much always consuming water
and or water plus carbohydrate depending
on the intensity and duration of the
exercise. I also tend to have very low
blood pressure and a couple of years ago
I had a really really bad fall when I
woke up in the morning and I was
jet-lagged. So I had just flown to
Brazil. So obviously you get a little
bit dehydrated on a plane and then the
first like you know you get in whatever
that night and then the next morning I
woke up got out of bed and faceplanted
into a table. You can probably still see
the scar on my forehead. And I got back
home and you know my doc measures my
blood pressure. It's like 95 over 60.
And he's like yeah you're just you're
really dehydrated man. Like you we need
to get a little more. And it's not like
I don't eat salt. I make zero effort to
restrict sodium in my diet, but clearly
I was just exercising too much, you
know? I mean, especially living in
Texas, like when I'm exercising
outdoors, I'm sweating like crazy. So,
it was like, you just got to get more
salt, man. So, I just went I literally
then did a super deep dive on hydration
and realized that there's basically two
ways to maximize hydration. Either you
consume water with a high enough not
just a high enough with the absolute
correct concentration of glucose in it
and the correct concentration is between
five and 6%. So that's 50 to 60 grams of
glucose per liter of fluid will maximize
water uptake through the sodium water
transporter or you consume um what's
called osmotic sodium in water. Those
are your two options uh with the with
the glucose one being slightly better.
And so what I realized is look, I don't
exercise long enough anymore to justify
it. And the only workout I do a week
that is intense enough to justify it is
that V2 max one where I'm I actually am
using glucose and water. But for the
rest of my workouts, I don't I don't
need it. I just need sodium and water.
And then I just went through every
product on the market. Like literally
went to Amazon, click click click click
click click click order every one of
them and realize at the end of the day
it's a commodity product. Get the one
that tastes the best because that's the
one you're going to have to suck down
every day. Peter, what's the most
important thing we didn't talk about
that we should have talked about as it
relates to your work, the science that
you're obsessed with at the moment, and
anything that my audience might and
should need to know that we haven't yet
discussed.
May maybe just the idea that it's really
tempting in in the world I live
in to want to find single sources of
problems, right? So there's always a
there's always a a boogeyman and I think
unfortunately the the entire landscape
of health influencing and social media
has has created a very unhelpful
narrative around many of these things.
And
so, you know, there's an effect called
the Dunning Krueger effect, which can be
sort of, you know, put into a cartoon,
right? Where it shows, you know,
experience on the, uh, x-axis and
confidence on the y- axis. So, you've
seen this graph, I'm sure, where it
starts out like it just skyrockets up to
what's called the peak of stupidity, and
then it kind of comes down into the
valley of humility, and then as you
become more and more of an expert, you
gradually rise, right? So, so this idea
of like the deeper you go out from
shore, the further from shore, the
deeper the water gets. And yet, and most
of what you're what what I'm sure your
audience is is going to be exposed to
because we all are if we're on social
media or whatever is like people
preaching from the peak of Mount
Stupidity. And so, I think maybe maybe
the thing to be thinking about is like
what are the signs of that, right? And
it's usually people that are like
there's one thing that is the thing,
right? like it's this additive in food
or it's this particular oil or it's this
sugar or it's this that and it's like
the truth of the matter is it isn't one
thing like it's it's really really
complicated and it's hard to talk about
things that are complicated and we tend
to just want to focus on one thing and
I've been guilty of this myself if I
look at stuff I was writing 15 years ago
I'm like man you really oversimplified
that too much like you overindex on that
and you ignored this thing and and so I
I just think that you know try try to
identify people out there who are
talking about things in a nuanced way
and you're generally going to be closer
to the direction of reality and how do
you deal with that as a podcast host
because you must sit there you know so
much about the subject matter and you
must sit there and hear people say to
you on your podcast things that you
don't agree with. Well, on my podcast,
it's easy because again, the nature of
my podcast is super inquisitive. So,
it's just very easy to to push back and
sometimes I don't. Sometimes I'll, you
know, I I was recently interviewing
somebody and they they made a comment
and and I just knew it was wrong, but I
I was like, you
know,
I I'll make an editorial comment later
about this for the audience to
understand that he's he's he's confusing
cause and effect. And I didn't push
back. and afterwards I thought I
probably should have I probably should
have pushed back on what he said a
little bit. Um but again on my podcast
it's easy. I think the bigger issue is
when people send me links to podcasts
like what do you think of this and I
have to go through and like explain why
what this person said is completely
wrong. I mean just completely unfounded
in any scientific uh basis whatsoever.
But they're a very compelling speaker
and so I get it like I get why you know
that that you would you know as as my
friend send that to me with concern. One
of the things we've introduced recently
well in the last 3 four months is just
we put um we have some independent
scientific individuals who have a look
at some of the things that are being
said just to cross reference and provide
context. We call it kind of context
checking. Nice. just because some of the
bigger things obviously there's so many
big as you were saying so many terms
like seed oils and this and this and
this that have started a bit of a
nutrition war on the internet and so we
just want to make sure that we provide
more context to these things so that a
person at home who isn't going to take
it upon themselves to apply that context
or do the research has more more of a
wide opinion but it's difficult because
as you say oftent times it's the best
speaker or the person with the most
conviction that gets heard. um you've
managed to break through all of that and
provide an tremendous amount of nuance
and complexity to these subjects, but
also to achieve the same focus and
articulation and resonance and
accessibility that some of those
individuals have achieved. I would
highly recommend anybody who has not
read this book to read this book because
this is the book on this subject. And I
say that I've interviewed many hundreds
of people, but this is the book on this
subject. It's been a global phenomenon
for all the reasons I've described about
it being so accessible. It's so nuanced,
but so um easy for someone like me to
understand even though I'm not a
scientist. And it's the book that I
recommend to my friends, to my family
when they're trying to understand the
subject matter of longevity in a world
where there is just so much information.
And that's why this book did so well and
it continues to do so unbelievably well.
But I'd also recommend everybody go
check out your podcast, which I love
watching. And also if they want um other
resources from you, where do we send
people? Peter, I think our website
probably. So Peter Aia MD the the
website will probably direct people to
all the different sort of places where
we have unbelievable amounts of free
information. So we have a newsletter
that comes out every single week. It's
free. It's really valuable. People, you
know, the open rate on that is through
the roof because it's not junk. like
it's it's we're putting something in
your inbox every single Sunday that
you're going to want to read about the
exact topics you're asking. So, I'm
going to link all of that below. So, put
all of the links below for for Peter's
work if you if you haven't become
obsessed like we all are here with
Peter's work. And I really mean that.
We're all massive fans of yours. Jack
was saying before you came, he said,
"Oh, I love Peter." You were saying this
the other day. I was saying this about a
week ago. And that's something that I
think we all feel because of the impact
you've had on our lives of demystifying
this information, but bringing it to us
in a way that's so so accessible, so
smart, and so trustworthy. So Peter,
thank you for what you're doing because
you're demystifying a very complicated
world for all of us. And it's a world
that if demystified, we stand a better
chance of living happier, healthier,
longer lives. And there's probably
nothing more important to to what makes
life meaningful and fulfilling. And me
being able to walk up and down those
stairs in Bali when I'm 75. So thank
you, Peter. It's tremendous. Really,
really tremendous. And I appreciate you
very very much. Peter, I I was so caught
up in um admiration of you that I forgot
that we have to ask you this question,
which is the question left by the last
guest. And that is what would you do if
you weren't
afraid? Why that
face? Oh.
Um because I've been dealing with that
for a long I've been dealing with
something for for a couple of weeks that
that is is is incredibly uh frightening,
but I think I've finally worked up the
courage to do it. Um but I can't speak
about it, unfortunately. Oh, really?
um at least not yet. I will be able to
one day. There will be a day when I will
be able to tell this story and it it
will it will be one of the most
important decisions I've ever made in my
life. Oh, I'm so curious and so
intrigued. Yeah. And it's um I can tell
by your reaction that it's going to be
profound for both you and all of us. I
could tell by your reaction because I
can tell that there's some element of
struggle there. So, yes, whatever it is,
best of luck and maybe we'll talk again
in the future once you've uh been able
to talk about it. I can't wait. Thank
you, Peter.
We launched these conversation cards and
they sold out and we launched them again
and they sold out again. We launched
them again and they sold out again
because people love playing these with
colleagues at work, with friends at
home, and also with family. And we've
also got a big audience that use them as
journal prompts. Every single time a
guest comes on the diary of a CEO, they
leave a question for the next guest in
the diary. And I've sat here with some
of the most incredible people in the
world, and they've left all of these
questions in the diary. And I've ranked
them from one to three in terms of the
depth. One being a starter question. And
level three, if you look on the back
here, this is a level three, becomes a
much deeper question. That builds even
more connection. If you turn the cards
over and you scan that QR code, you can
see who answered the card and watch the
video of them answering it in real time.
So, if you would like to get your hands
on some of these conversation cards, go
to the diary.com or look at the link in
the description below. This has always
blown my mind a little bit. 53% of you
that listen to the show regularly
haven't yet subscribed to the show. So,
could I ask you for a favor? If you like
the show and you like what we do here
and you want to support us, the free
simple way that you can do just that is
by hitting the subscribe button. And my
commitment to you is if you do that,
then I'll do everything in my power, me
and my team, to make sure that this show
is better for you every single week.
We'll listen to your feedback. We'll
find the guests that you want me to
speak to, and we'll continue to do what
we do. Thank you so much. Heat. Heat.
[Music]
I
Wow.
[Music]